Early Muslim history was a turbulent era on the methods of succession of power. The first leader of Islam was the Prophet Muhammad, who had that claim by being the last prophet sent by God, and the person who united the Arabs into becoming a community under one religion. A theme that came to govern the times that followed the Prophet’s death was that of the struggle for dominance. Various interpretations came about on how the possession of power should be handled, and this led to an onset of many civil wars and infighting between the elite Arab tribes. Since the caliphate was a relatively new community, much of its laws were still in development. Because of this, the legal tradition regarding whether a caliph should be chosen via appointment or election was a contested point. The very first caliphs were selected by a group of scholars, but later on dynasties and rules of succession were introduces. Due to the Muslim legal tradition being an ever-changing vehicle during the early periods of the Islamic Caliphate, the knowledge that was being transmitted was easily challenged: seen by the ongoing dispute of the Umayyad Dynasty, where their own interpretation allowed them to become khalifat Allah, or God’s caliph, and also alter the method of transfer of power to establish their lineage as the one that should always be in power. In Imam Khomeini’s text “Islamic Government”, he says, “The body of Islamic laws that exist in the Qur’an and Sunnah has been accepted by the Muslims and recognized by them as worthy of obedience. This consent and acceptance facilitates the task of government and makes it truly belong to the people” (Khomeini 29). He argues that once Islam has been accepted, this also includes the government that is explained by it. This is similar to the Umayyad claim to power, where they believed God granted it to them to establish a succession of the covenant and maintain it within their family.
Prophet Muhammad had a pivotal role in the Muslim community. He was their leader as well as the central figure of their religion. When he died in 632AD, the question arose of who was to be his successor. This period is known as the period of the Rightly Guided Caliphs, and it is a point of contention between Sunni and Shia Muslims. First, it was deemed that Prophet Muhammad explicitly nominated no successor, so the next caliph was selected by a group of Muhammad’s companions. This caliph was Abu Bakr, Prophet Muhammad’s father-in-law. He came into a period of conflict between tribes, which he resolved and was able to continue the unity and solidarity that the caliphate previously had. Abu Bakr had a very short reign, after which he appointed Umar ibn al-Kittab, another of Prophet Muhammad’s companions, to be the next caliph. Umar was also the one to introduce the method of selecting a caliphal successor via an election committee. This election committee, or shura, was one of the first “laws” concerning the transfer of power in the caliphate. After Umar’s assassination, the shura elected Uthman ibn Affan, another companion of Prophet Muhammad, as caliph. 
The third caliph was chosen via election, a legal tradition that established of the method of succession, and it also included the oath of allegiance by the subjects. However, this method was widely challenged by the supporters of Ali, Muhammad’s cousin and son-in-law. The followers of Ali, called the shiat-u-Ali or Shii, believed that the first three caliphs had taken what was rightfully Ali’s. They believed Ali to be the true successor of Muhammad, and they believed that the caliph should come from within Muhammad’s family. Following Uthman’s assassination, Ali was urged to accept the title, but in the end he only carried it for a short time. Ali ruled throughout a period of instability, where two different civil wars were fought against him. These civil wars were known as Fitna, and were headed by Prophet Muhammad’s widow Aisha and by Syrian governor Muawiyah. It was during the Fitna against Muawiyah that a new branch broke of from the Shii, known as the Kharijites. The Kharijites came back to assassinate Ali in 662AD, leaving a power vacancy which allowed Muawiyah to extend his control over Syria to that of the entire Muslim empire.
Muawiyah’s claim to power brought in a new era that came to be known as the Umayyad Dynasty. Muawiyah was the first of the Umayyad that held the title of caliph, and it was his many political and ideological actions that ensured the title stayed within this name. His rule is characterized as “imperial, dynastic, and dominated by an Arab military aristocracy” (Esposity 38), all of which were important components of his authority. The Islamic community came to be transformed into one that worked to expand its borders, and it was successful in doing so. During the Umayyad Dynasty, the Muslim empire grew into Europe through North Africa and Iberia, and even reached the Indian subcontinent. 
In order to be able to do achieve these feats, the Umayyads had to first establish themselves as the true leaders of the Muslims. The last caliph had to deal with two civil wars, so the region was rife with unrest. There had to be a push for reunification and acceptance of the current leadership if things were to be normalized. To achieve this, ideological claims were utilized to persuade the people. They had to hold the image that they were the rightful inheritors of the caliphate, such that to hold rivals off from engaging in another civil war. Loyalty and leadership were important characteristics, which were used to maintain loyalty and support from their armies and from the elite Arab families. They wanted to achieve reunification under one ruler of the conquered lands, and holding the title of caliph would allow them to do so.
The establishment of a Dynasty was done so that only the Umayyad family could be in power. To achieve this, they said it was a succession of he covenant, or walayat al-ahd, that gave them permissibility to transfer power within the family. Another reason they were able to establish their dynasty was their location and Syria, since it was a wealthy province with a strong and loyal army. Moving the capital of the caliphate to Damascus further centered the power into the Umayyad hands, as they already held many positions of power in this area. Having talented politicians in their ranks was another bonus, as this added legitimacy to them becoming the ruling class. However, this claim to the caliphate had many opponents and was not viewed positively by some, so their actions were condemned. Some opponents were the Kharijites, the Shii, angry non-Arab Muslims, and early legal scholars. To understand the reasoning for the opposition, we will first examine how the Umayyad Dynasty handled the caliphate. 
When Muawiyah rose to power, he did it with a powerful backing of friendly tribes and a strong Army. To further his power reach, Muawiyah introduced a pledge of loyalty. This pledge of loyalty was equated with belief in Islam, so anyone against it was labeled as an unbeliever. This was because the people had to accept that the caliphate was something necessary for them, and that they had to always be ready to respond to their obligations as a citizen of the caliphate. One of these obligations was to be in a standby to engage in holy war, or hijra, if it was required. Another obligation was that once an Arab migrated from the desert into the caliphate, they could not leave. If they were to reject political authority or any of the community’s obligations, it would be equated to rejecting God and His community. This is because the Umayyad’s requested the pledge of allegiance, or bay’a, to be given to them. Abd Allah ibn Umar, an important early authority regarding Islamic law, said regarding the pledge of allegiance: 

“To begin: we have already pledged allegiance to this man according to the pact of God and His Messenger, and I heard the Prophet say: “Truly a flag is raised for the traitor (al-ghādir) on the Day of Resurrection, (on which) is stated of what his betrayal consists, and that there is no greater treachery, besides idolatry, than to pledge allegiance to a man according to the pact of God and His Messenger and then to undo (nakatha) his bayʿa” (Marsham 99).

Abd Allah ibn Umar places this damnation for breaking the oath, essentially calling for people to obey the caliph once they incurred the pledge. He also states in another tradition that, “I heard the Messenger of God say, ‘Whoever withdraws his hand from obedience has no defense on the Day of Resurrection, and whoever dies in separation from the community dies a pagan death” (Marsham 100), which marks the Umayyad Dynasty as something worth following. Having the backing of legal scholars was imperative, and they received it by invoking parallels to an obligation to obey if they were to be part of Islam. They now had an absolute authority that should not be challenged, so the caliph and their representatives were not challenged. The pledge of loyalty therefore became a cultural norm, which was usually carried out publicly so that others saw it. This claim was later taken by the Umayyads to call themselves God’s caliph, or khalifat Allah. This further powered the claim into becoming a religion one, which had to be followed in fear of repercussions such as death, loss of income, or exile by not accepting the claim and pledging loyalty.
The pledge of loyalty was not an exclusive act done for the establishment of the caliphate. It was also made towards the current caliphs desired successors. It was a custom similar to the Roman succession, where it was an act approved by God and ratified by the people through their approval. This approval meant that the caliph was not a king, but instead it was a religious succession that was desired by God to occur. This religious succession (wali al-ahd) was first promoted by the Poet Jalil, “The possessors of authority (ulū al-ḥukūma) from Quraysh said, ‘The pledge is incumbent upon us (ʿalaynā al-bayʿ) when the race is run,’ And they 